This book is about the angst of normal people, of
people like us. It offers an explanation of why we are
so much more likely to be miserable than our
grandparents, why we are so discontented and self-attacking,
why the moments of emotional richness and freedom of our
childhood are less frequent, why so many of us feel there is
something missing from life.
It establishes that, compared with 1950, the general rise in
aspirations has spawned depression and an epidemic of
compulsions like drug abuse, gambling and eating disorders.
We compare ourselves obsessively and enviously,
corrupting the quality of our inner lives. No sooner do we
achieve a goal than we move the goalposts to create a new
one, leaving ourselves permanently depleted. There is an
outbreak of living in the future and a pathological re-
enactment of the past.
People with most of these problems are more likely than
those without to have low levels of the neurotransmitter
serotonin, the so-called ‘happiness brain chemical’. Given that
there is a chemistry of despair, one might suppose that it has a
chemical, physical cause. Perhaps the problem is pollution. Is
it something to do with the processing of the foods we eat or
the methods of cultivation of the raw materials? Maybe the
new technologies such as mobile phones and computers are
interfering with our brains? Though far from impossible that
some of these things are contributing, the strongest contender
by far for explaining what has gone wrong is the way we
organise society. I shall show that advanced capitalism, as
currently organised, creates low-serotonin societies. Far from
being the product of other chemicals, serotonin levels in animal
and human brains largely reflect what is happening around
them, socially and emotionally.
Put crudely, advanced capitalism makes money out of
misery and dissatisfaction, as if it were encouraging us to fill
the psychic void with material goods. It can also profit from
fostering spurious individualism by encouraging us to define
ourselves through our purchases, with ever more precisely
marketed products that create a fetishistic concern to have
‘this’ rather than ‘that’, even though there is often no
significant practical or aesthetic difference. It can even make
money from restoring the chemical imbalance in our brains
which results from these false ambitions and identities, by
selling pills and therapeutic services.
I am not suggesting that there is a conspiracy by a secret
society of top-hat-clad, black-coated bankers and blindly
materialistic retailers to make us miserable. Writing of
advanced capitalism as if it has volition is to make human an
abstract entity which has no will of its own, just as
describing genes as selfish is nonsense. But it has to be
acknowledged that the way advanced capitalism happens to
have evolved, it does very nicely at both ends (creating and
curing misery), with our inner lives footing the bill.