The Channel 4 documentary ‘Earth Alert’, which was
shown at 8 pm on June 25th, was well-scripted and well-
directed. This informative programme highlighted many
important environmental issues and showed how
effective or ineffective local governments are at
protecting our environment.
The documentary drew viewers’ attention to
environmental problems across the country and clearly
demonstrated the serious dangers our environment faces.
In addition, viewers were shown how they, as individuals,
can help to conserve and protect the environment by
recycling waste products, saving energy, using public
transport and so on. The advice given was useful and
sensible, and was easy for people to follow.
Then, the programme went on to discuss the role that
local governments play in saving the planet. It quickly
became clear that governments are simply not doing
enough to protect the environment. The presenter
explained how cheap and easy it would be for
governments to start certain projects which would make
our world a better place to live in. These could be
recycling programmes to prevent unnecessary waste,
park and route systems to keep cars out of our city
centres, or tree-planting programmes to ensure that
enough oxygen is produced. Unfortunately, according to
‘Earth Alert’, very few governments are willing to spend
time and money on improving environmental conditions.
The most upsetting part of this excellent documentary
was when the presenter highlighted how poor our own
Yorkshire Council environmental record is. It seems that
it has done almost nothing to reverse its terrible record
on river pollution and forest protection.
The documentary ended by advising worried viewers
to write to members of local government and explain
their fears for the environment and the need for projects
to save it.
‘Earth Alert’ was a powerful documentary which made
many viewers realise the serious danger our world is in
and which encouraged people to fight for planet Earth
and force local governments to take action. It was
educational, interesting and well worth watching.
Part 2 – 4
Dear students,
I am delighted to announce that the Social Club is back
with plenty of fresh faces and ideas. As events organiser,
I know my work is cut out for me; my predecessor, Matt
Hall, ran a pretty successful operation offering plenty of
creative and educational events for the student body.
I know it will be difficult to fill those great shoes, but I will
certainly try.
This year, we have decided to take our education a step
further – we are going to engage ourselves in the books
we’ll be reading. One of our set readings is
Shakespeare’s ‘Romeo and Juliet’. The Globe Theatre is
putting on a performance of the play in October. We felt
that it would be of great educational benefit to see the
play performed. We will be posting dates and ticket sales
for that activity soon.
To further our educational voyage, we have also decided
that the main event for the year should be a ‘Shakespeare
Day’. Students will dress as characters from
Shakespeare’s plays and entertain teachers, other
students, parents and friends with performances of
extracts from some of the famous plays. This will be
combined with an evening out to a 16th-century dance
where we will all dance to Elizabethan music and try
typical food and drink from Shakespeare’s time. Try-outs
for the performances will begin soon, so keep checking
the board of announcements outside the main office.