If you want to know about the wildlife and wonders of Yala national park, Sajith Withanage is the go-to expert. And as head ranger for Hilton Yala Resort, he likes nothing more than sharing his passion for this vast wilderness with guests
By Tristan Rutherford

More than 2,000 years ago, a large Buddhist community settled in the Yala region of Sri Lanka at the island’s southern tip. Temples were built, water holes dug and big areas of forest cleared for grazing, creating a huge monastic complex, parts of which survive today. Hundreds of years later, when the community went into decline, it left behind a landscape ideal for herbivores such as water buffalo and spotted deer. And where herbivores thrive, carnivores follow.

Today Yala national park, Sri Lanka’s first nature reserve, hosts one of the densest populations of leopards on Earth. At dawn and dusk, they stalk wild boar and sambar deer, before pouncing at a breakneck sprint. Living alongside them are countless insect and bird species, plus 43 other types of mammal from mighty elephants and buffalos to jackals, crocodiles and the endangered sloth bear. There’s a home for them all in the reserve’s vast and biodiverse landscape, stretching from coastal dunes to monsoon forest. In all, Yala covers 1,300 sq kms (500 sq miles) and areas are increasingly being opened to visitors.
Travellers keen to explore this beautiful place will be hard pressed to find a more knowledgable and enthusiastic guide than Sajith Withanage, head ranger at Hilton Yala Resort, a hotel wonderfully sited at the edge of the national park with stunning views of the Indian Ocean. Withanage credits his parents with instilling his love of Yala. “They were crazy wildlife people,” he recalls. As a baby, he would be driven to see the park’s colony of Sri Lankan elephants in his family’s Austin A30 car.

It is perhaps not surprising that he chose to study natural sciences, and was then offered a job at Sri Lanka’s Department of Wildlife Conservation. “But my dad said: ‘Sajith, if you join the department you’ll be happy, but you’ll never get close to the animals while you’re holding a fancy camera.’” So he followed his heart and headed to game parks in Africa to train as a professional guide, honing his understanding of safety, ethics and tracking through the Field Guides Association of Southern Africa.