Vietnam tariffs forced Nintendo to scramble

Since its launch in March 2017, the Switch has become one of the best-selling video game consoles in history, with more than 150m units sold worldwide. Nintendo teased its successor in January and gave a full reveal during an 2 April live stream, announcing the device would ship on 5 June with a hefty $450 price tag in the US (or $500 when bundled with Mario Kart World). Just hours later, Trump stepped up to a podium at the Rose Garden, chart in tow, to announce a new volley of tariffs on imports on countries with a trade deficit with the US.

Among them: a 24% tariff on Japan, where Nintendo is headquartered, and a 46% tariff on Vietnam, where the bulk of its Switch manufacturing takes place. Stock markets plummeted as Nintendo fans collectively wondered whether the company would pass the costs of those steep duties on to them.

US pre-orders for the Switch 2 were supposed to begin later that week on 9 April. Nintendo delayed that date so it could “assess the potential impact of tariffs and evolving market conditions”. The 5 June release date, the company noted, would stay the same. Gamers flocked to various social media sites to vent their frustration – much of it directed not at Nintendo, but at the Trump administration. Pre-orders resumed on 24 April and, predictably, the console quickly sold out.

Nintendo did not immediately respond to a request for comment
Prepared for the wrong tariffs, saved by ‘taco’

Johnson notes that Nintendo, like many other consumer electronics makers, has spent years grappling with the question of where to produce.

In 2019, during the tail end of the first Trump administration, the gaming company began shifting production of the Switch from China to Vietnam in an effort to sidestep US tariffs on Chinese imports. Nintendo still manufactures some Switch products in China, but those units are typically shipped to non-US markets. Other major consumer tech companies, such as Apple, have similarly moved parts of their manufacturing operations from China to countries such as India to mitigate tariff impacts.