But this “Praguer” who has long lived in the Hague is being feted in Oslo. “I was introduced to this country by a composer, Arne Nordheim, who wrote music for me,” he says. The Norwegian Ballet has been staging Kylián’s work for almost 40 years. Oslo’s long-awaited opera house opened in 2008 with his ballet programme. “There is no other house in the world” that could put on this festival’s installations alongside the performances, he says.

Those sculptures bisected by the glass facade, modelled on eight of his dancers and rendered at 138%, provide another way to invite new audiences into this most playful of opera buildings whose openly accessible roof is a popular vantage point. The figures’ positioning, part inside and part outside, brings to mind the uprooted, upside-down tree that is suspended above the stage in Kylián’s Wings of Wax (1997) and continues his interest in transitional states. His choreography frequently gives dancers a winged position like resting marionettes – as in Petite Mort (1991), their heads bowed, shoulders hunched and elbows out, evoking a burden but also an imminent launch to liberation. Entitled Wings of Time, the festival is promoted with a poster of Kylián as if taking flight, with one arm raised alongside its reflection, the image mirroring an airborne gull in the distance. “We are on the way constantly,” he says of this impulse in his work. “I say ‘now’,” he pauses, “and it’s already in the past.”
Wings of Wax

The other installations on display evoke not just Kylián choreography but his previous productions’ set designs. In the meditative, healing Ensō, set to Arvo Pärt’s Spiegel im Spiegel, a mirror rotates above a calligraphic circle on the floor, casting shadows as well as a latticed light, the mirror rippling with the foaming crash of a wave that recalls the silvery wreckage of John Macfarlane’s set for Forgotten Land (1981). It is that piece, opening with the sound of the wind and featuring a storm of dancers’ feet and elemental percussion, that draws on the century-old Munch painting The Dance of Life. Munch’s depiction of a woman at three ages – enigmatically wistful in youth, solemn in middle age, eventually mournful – gave Kylián goosebumps when he first saw it. “Munch was a troubled soul – that kind of fight with the canvas and with your own problems, it beams out of the paintings,” he says. “I tried to portray it as well as I could with Benjamin Britten’s music.”

The exhibition’s use of backstage areas is fitting for a choreographer who has often challenged notions of where the playing space – and even a production itself – starts and finishes. No More Play (1988), uncannily set to Anton Webern, finds a dancer rolling across the very edge of the stage, arms spiralling into the orchestra pit, and ends with the full cast dangling there. Bella Figura (1995) begins when the audience are still finding their seats as dancers rehearse their moves, Kylián taking the stage to make the odd tweak. The performance gives a supporting role of sorts to the theatre’s layered curtains which in one illusion seem to hold a dancer in mid-air and are used for an effect akin to an iris film technique, framing certain dancers and obscuring others. Kylián plays with other silent cinema tricks in a quirky screen programme featuring his long-term partner, the dancer Sabine Kupferberg, who makes a superb bowler-hatted clown in the short film Between Entrance and Exit from 2013. (That title is telling for a choreographer who loves to bring dancers on in eye-catching ways, such as under billowing sheets.)