The twentieth century has frequently been labelled as the age of opinion, and not necessarily in a positive
way, as any quick glance at social media will demonstrate. In fact, look more closely into the insults
traded on social media platforms and the sensationalist ways in which the media presents differing public
opinions as polarising, and the situation starts to look even worse. The modern world can often feel rude,
and people often behave as though they are totally unwilling to consider, or even listen to, views that are
not aligned with their own. It appears that a change is long overdue, and perhaps diplomacy could be the
answer to turning this situation around.
Developed over millennia as a way to mediate between grumpy leaders hell-bent on inflicting their own
ideas on the world, diplomacy was once thought of as an art, in the same vein as public speaking, polite
conversation and negotiation. It grew out of trade interactions in the Middle East, China and India, and
incorporated a variety of skills, philosophies and cultural nuances as it went. Throughout the majority of
history, the role of the diplomat was to convey information and messages and negotiate in less
inflammatory ways than their leaders might have done. These leaders could quite easily justify starting
wars in the heat of the moment due to a perceived personal attack from an enemy. In short, they sought
to ensure any interaction with another state or power remained on an even keel and avoided conflict at
all costs.
Although the word ‘diplomacy’ conjures up a long-gone age of stuffy meetings between politicians and
civil servants in palaces and embassies, there is little difference in the goal of diplomacy nowadays. For
example, in the complex relationships of modern society, whether in our personal lives, in the workplace
or matters of international negotiation, bringing back the art of diplomacy could be invaluable. It is a
highly specific skill that requires people to put aside their personal desires and work towards a common
good. In this respect it is extremely challenging insofar as it involves putting forward a case for something
strongly and effectively enough for it to be considered by another party, but not in such a way as to cause
offence or irritation. As the British journalist and writer David Frost once said, “Diplomacy is the art of
letting somebody else have your way.”
We are inclined to view diplomacy as an innate ability, something that only a select few are blessed with.
Yet, with some hard work and determination it is actually straightforward to learn. For people who make
a special effort, the benefits will very soon become apparent. There are, as one would expect, certain
tricks of the trade that can be useful starting places for novices. The greatest of these is the ability to
understand the fragility of human nature and the need for acceptance and for an attentive audience. This
is often the underlying cause of arguments as well as being a plausible explanation for much of the verbal
abuse found online today. Being diplomatic means acknowledging the feelings of others, taking time to
demonstrate empathy, and casting aside emotion for logic and reasonableness. It means being patient and
versatile in interpersonal communication, and, above all, a commitment to agreement and collaboration
rather than individuality and division.
Having said this, there are people who seem