Offices and bars are full of casual obscenity, but most British newspapers are ... well, not
necessarily careful about language, but careful about bad words anyway. The phrase 'family
newspaper' is an ineluctable part of our lives. Newspapers are not in the business of giving
gratuitous offence. It is a limitation of newspaper writing, and one everybody in the
business, whether writing or reading, understands and accepts. There are many other
necessary limitations, and most of these concern time and space.
Newspapers have dominated sportswriting in Britain for years, and have produced their own
totem figures and doyens. But ten years ago, a new player entered the game. This was the
phenomenon of men's magazines; monthly magazines for men that had actual words in
them - words for actually reading. GQ was the pioneer and, in my totally unbiased opinion as
the long-term author of the magazine's sports column, it leads the way still, leaving the rest
panting distantly in its wake.
Sport, is of course, a blindingly obvious subject for a men's magazine - but it could not be
tacked in a blindingly obvious way. Certainly, one of the first things GQ was able to offer was
a new way of writing about sport, but this was not so much a cunning plan as a necessity.
The magazine was doomed, as it were, to offer a whole new range of freedoms to its
sportswriters. Heady and rather alarming freedoms. Freedom of vocabulary was simply the
most obvious one and, inevitably, it appealed to the schoolboy within us. But space and time
were the others, and these possibilities meant that the craft of sportswriting had to be
reinvented.
Unlike newspapers, a magazine can offer a decent length of time to research and to write.
These are, you would think, luxuries - especially to those of us who are often required to
read an 800-word match report over the telephone the instant the final whistle has gone.
Such a discipline is nerve-racking, but as long as you can get it done at all, you have done a
good job. No one expects a masterpiece under such circumstances. In some ways, the
ferocious restrictions make the job easier. But a long magazine deadline gives you the
disconcerting and agoraphobic freedom to research, to write, to think.