What drives moderately intelligent person to put themselves up for acceptance or disparagement? In
short, what sort of individual wants to be a comedian? When we hear the very word, what does the
label suggest? Other professions, callings and occupations attract separate and distinct types of
practitioner. Some stereotypes are so familiar as to be cheaply laughable examples from the world
of travesty, among them absent-minded professors, venal lawyers, gloomy detectives and cynical
reporters. But what corny characteristics do we contribute to comedians? To a man or woman, are
they generally parsimonious, vulgar, shallow, arrogant, introspective, hysterically insecure, snug,
autocratic, amoral, and selfish? Read their superficial stories in the tabloids and so they would
appear.
Rather than look at the complete image, perhaps we need to explore the initial motives behind a
choice of career. Consider first those who prefer a sort of anonymity in life, the ones who’d rather
wear a uniform. The psychological make-up of individuals who actively seek to resign their
individuality is apparent among those who surrender to the discipline of a military life. The
emotional and intellectual course taken by those who are drawn to anonymity is easily observed but
not easily deflected. They want to be told what to do and then be required to do it over and over
again in a safety of a routine, often behind the disguises of a number of livery. If their egos ache
with the need for recognition and praise, it’s a pain that must be contained, frustrated or satisfied
within the rut they occupy. The mere idea of standing up in front of an audience and demanding
their attention is abhorrent.
Nor will we find our comics among the doormats and dormice, the meek. There’s precious little
comedy in the lives of quiet hobbyists, bashful scholars, hermits, anchorites and recluses, the
discreet and the modest, ones who deliberately select a position of obscurity an seclusion. Abiding
quietly in this stratum of society, somewhere well below public attention level, there is humour,
yes, since humour can endure in the least favourable circumstances, persisting like lichen in
Antarctica. And jokes. Many lesser-known comedy writers compose their material in the secret
corners of an unassuming existence. I know of two, both content to be minor figures in the civil
service, who send in topical jokes to radio and TV shows on condition that their real names are
never revealed.
In both cases I’ve noticed that their comic invention, though clever, is based upon wordplay, puns
and similar equivoques, never an aggressive comic observation of life. Just as may be a certain
sterility in the self-effacement of a humble life, so it seems feasible that the selection process of
what’s funny is emasculated before it even commences. If you have no ginger and snap in your
daily round, with little familiarity with strong emotions, it seems likely that your sense of fun will
be limited by timidity to a simple juggling with language.